#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass docbook
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

phpGroupWare admin/config.php
\layout Abstract

A brief introduction to writing hooks and templates for any application
 to use this admin interface, by
\layout Abstract

Miles Lott <milosch@phpgroupware.org> Dec 22, 2001.
\layout Section

Files
\layout Subsection

config.tpl (required)
\layout Standard

In your application/templates/default directory, create a new template file
 named 'config.tpl'.
 This will be included by config.php and used to draw the page.
 This template should include a POST method form.
 The following template tags may be used:
\layout Enumerate

{action_url} - A phpgw->link to config.php will be inserted.
\layout Enumerate

{title} - This will be parsed to display 'Site Configuration'.
\layout Enumerate

{th_bg},{th_text},{row_on},{row_off} - Replaced with the current theme colors.
\layout Standard

and the following special types:
\layout Enumerate

{lang_XXX} - Filled with lang('XXX').
\layout Enumerate

{value_XXX} - Filled with the current value of config item 'XXX'.
\layout Enumerate

{selected_XXX} - set to '', or ' selected' if an option value is current.
\layout Enumerate

{hook_XXX} - Calls a function named XXX (will be discussed later).
\layout Enumerate

{checked_XXX+YYY} - Handles checkbox/radio values set to YYY or '' (will
 be discussed later).
\layout Standard

Following is an example from the addressbook application:
\layout Code

<form method="POST" action="{action_url}">
\layout Code

<table border="0" align="center">
\layout Code

 <tr bgcolor="{th_bg}">
\layout Code

  <td colspan="2"><font color="{th_text}">&nbsp;<b>{title}</b></font></td>
\layout Code

 </tr> <tr bgcolor="{th_err}">
\layout Code

  <td colspan="2">&nbsp;<b>{error}</b></font></td>
\layout Code

 </tr>
\layout Code

<!-- END header -->
\layout Code

<!-- BEGIN body -->
\layout Code

 <tr bgcolor="{row_on}">
\layout Code

  <td colspan="2">&nbsp;</td>
\layout Code

 </tr>
\layout Code

 <tr bgcolor="{row_off}">
\layout Code

  <td colspan="2">&nbsp;<b>{lang_Addressbook}/{lang_Contact_Settings}</b></font>
\layout Code

</td>
\layout Code

 </tr>
\layout Code

 <tr bgcolor="{row_on}">
\layout Code

  <td>{lang_Contact_application}:</td>
\layout Code

  <td><input name="newsettings[contact_application]" value="{value_contact_appli
cation}"></td>
\layout Code

 </tr>
\layout Code

...
\layout Standard

Note the fieldname, newsettings[contact_application].
 This array name must be used for the form values.
 Next, note the value setting for this form element, {value_contact_application}.
 This indicates that we want the current value of the config setting, 'contact_a
pplication', to be set and displayed on the form.
 Lastly, look at the template element, {lang_Contact_application}.
 Here, the value from the lang db table will be inserted if available.
\layout Standard

Let's take a look at part of the preferences/default/config.tpl:
\layout Code

 <tr bgcolor="{row_on}">
\layout Code

  <td>{lang_Country_Selection} ({lang_Text_Entry}/{lang_SelectBox}):</td>
\layout Code

  <td>
\layout Code

   <select name="newsettings[countrylist]">
\layout Code

{hook_country_set}
\layout Code

   </select>
\layout Code

  </td>
\layout Code

 </tr>
\layout Standard

Here, we are adding a new element, {hook_country_set}.
 This brings up the next file we will need to parse this value, hook_config.inc.ph
p.
 But first, let's look at the last template type, 'checked':
\layout Code

<input name="newsettings[enable_remote_addressbook]" type="radio" value=""{check
ed_enable_remote_addressbook+}>{lang_no}
\layout Code

<input name="newsettings[enable_remote_addressbook]" type="radio" value="True"{c
hecked_enable_remote_addressbook+True}>{lang_yes}
\layout Standard

We want to check the value of the setting 'enable_remote_addressbook'.
 The value could be '' or 'True'.
 We use the '+' character to isolate the config name from the check value.
 If the value is empty or unset in the phpgw_config table, {checked_enable_remot
e_addressbook+} is replaced with ' checked'.
 If the value is 'True',{checked_enable_remote_addressbook+True} is replaced
 with ' checked'.
 Note that the part after the '+' character matches what is in the value=
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

XXX
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 part in the html for this form element.
\layout Subsection

hook_config.inc.php (optional)
\layout Standard

At each invocation of config.php, a call to the common class function hook_single
() is made.
 It attempts to include a file, hook_config.inc.php as a set of code for config.php
 to use.
 In the case of the preferences example above, using hook_country_set, here
 is the corresponding function in preferences/inc/hook_config.inc.php:
\layout Code

function country_set($config)
\layout Code

{
\layout Code

    $country = array( 'user_choice' => 'Users Choice', 'force_select' =>
 'Force Selectbox' );
\layout Code

    while (list ($key, $value) = each ($country))
\layout Code

    {
\layout Code

        if ($config['countrylist'] == $key)
\layout Code

        {
\layout Code

            $selected = ' selected';
\layout Code

        } 
\layout Code

        else
\layout Code

        {
\layout Code

            $selected = '';
\layout Code

        }
\layout Code

        $descr = lang($value);
\layout Code

        $out .= '<option value="' .
 $key .
 '"' .
 $selected .
 '>' .
 $descr .
 '</option>' .
 "
\backslash 
n";
\layout Code

    }
\layout Code

    return $out;
\layout Code

}
\layout Standard

Note again the template value we used earlier, {hook_country_set}.
 This causes config.php to look for a function named country_set().
 Since we included the file with this function via the hook_single() call,
 this function is executed.
 It's return is a string, and the function prints nothing itself.
\layout Subsection

hook_config_validate.inc.php (optional)
\layout Standard

Once the admin clicks the submit button to post the form, we can optionally
 validate their input using one or many different functions.
 This is done by first making another call to hook_single() in the API common
 class.
 This time, the name config_validate is used, so common tries to include
 'application/inc/hook_config_validate.inc.php'.
\layout Standard

If this file exists, it sets a var to tell config.php it was found.
 Following then are functions named after each config we want to validate.
 The following example is for addressbook:
\layout Code

    $GLOBALS['phpgw_info']['server']['found_validation_hook'] = True;
\layout Code

\layout Code

    /* Check a specific setting.
 Name must match the setting.
 */
\layout Code

    function ldap_contact_context($value='')
\layout Code

    {
\layout Code

        if($value == $GLOBALS['phpgw_info']['server']['ldap_context'])
\layout Code

        {
\layout Code

            $GLOBALS['config_error'] = 'Contact context for ldap must be
 different from the context used for accounts';
\layout Code

        }
\layout Code

        elseif($value == $GLOBALS['phpgw_info']['server']['ldap_group_context'])
\layout Code

        {
\layout Code

            $GLOBALS['config_error'] = 'Contact context for ldap must be
 different from the context used for groups';
\layout Code

        }
\layout Code

        else
\layout Code

        {
\layout Code

            $GLOBALS['config_error'] = '';
\layout Code

        }
\layout Code

    }
\layout Standard

Here we created a function to check the entered value for the config item,
 ldap_contact_context.
 We want to make sure the admin did not set this value to one which would
 conflict with another config item, used for accounts or groups in phpGroupWare.
\layout Standard

config.php calls this function, sending it the POSTed value.
 config.php continues, adding all other config items from the POSTed values.
\layout Standard

The variable $GLOBALS['config_error'] is parsed through lang(), then appended
 to the local variable, $error.
 If this has any value after the POSTed variables are checked, the form
 then has its {error} tag filled with this result.
 The form is displayed again, with the error.
 If $error has no value, config.php redirects to admin/index.php.
\layout Standard

However, there is one more function that may be included in hook_config_validate.
inc.php:
\layout Code

    /* Check all settings to validate input.
 Name must be 'final_validation' */
\layout Code

    function final_validation($value='') 
\layout Code

    {
\layout Code

        if($value['contact_repository'] == 'ldap' && !$value['ldap_contact_dn'])
\layout Code

        {
\layout Code

            $GLOBALS['config_error'] = 'Contact dn must be set';
\layout Code

        }
\layout Code

        elseif($value['contact_repository'] == 'ldap' && !$value['ldap_contact_c
ontext'])
\layout Code

        {
\layout Code

            $GLOBALS['config_error'] = 'Contact context must be set';
\layout Code

        }
\layout Code

        else
\layout Code

        {
\layout Code

            $GLOBALS['config_error'] = '';
\layout Code

        }
\layout Code

    }
\layout Standard

config.php checks for the existence of the function 'final_validation()'.
 This function can be used to check all form values at once.
 It gets sent the entire $newsettings array POSTed from the form.
 As with the other functions in this file, final_validation() should set
 $GLOBALS['config_error'] if there is a problem.
\the_end
